User Guide
==========

.. highlight:: none

This user guide is still a work in progress, and for now it's just about
documenting advanced tips and tricks.

If you're interested in helping with the documentation, please get in touch.



Adding a radio station
----------------------

Out of the box, Goodvibes is pre-configured with the favorite radio stations of
the author (that's me).

The first thing you'll want to do is to listen to it of course, and possibly
remove it (which is easy). Then you'll want to add your own favorite stations.
And here comes the first (and hopefully the last) painful moment with
Goodvibes.

So it's 2020, and there is no way to search for a radio station in Goodvibes.
You might think that you would just do a research by entering the name of you
favorite station (say "Radio Grenouille"), get a list of results, and select
the right one. Well, no, it doesn't work like that. Instead, you will have to
enter manually the name of the radio station, and the URL of the audio stream.
Your fingers on the keyboard. Plain old fashioned.

So, how to do that? You know the name of your favorite radio station, but what
about the URL of the stream?

The easiest solution is probably to open your web browser, visit a "radio
directory" website (that's a site that list plenty of radios, along with some
details), and you do your search there. If you're lucky, you'll find it, then
you'll look around hard for the URL of the stream, and finally copy it into
Goodvibes.

A list of websites that come to mind:

 * `Community Radio Browser <http://www.radio-browser.info>`_
 * `Icecast directory <http://dir.xiph.org/>`_
 * `Shoutcast directory <https://directory.shoutcast.com/>`_

The second solution, a bit more involved, technically speaking, is to open the
website of your favorite radio station with your web browser, then open the
Developers Tools, and more specifically the Network tab. Now, play the radio,
and look at the HTTP requests passing by. There should be the URL of the audio
stream somewhere.

If you ask yourself "why so complicated", well, it's because there is simply no
radio directory that would be exhaustive, maintained, and open (meaning free to
access), and that Goodvibes could query in order to find your favorite stations
easily.



Keyboard Shortcuts
------------------

Assuming your keyboard comes with multimedia keys, then it's all you need to
control Goodvibes. On modern desktops, multimedia key events are caught by the
desktop environment, which then forwards it to the multimedia player. It should
work out of the box, assuming that you didn't disabled the *MPRIS2 D-Bus
Server* setting.

On older desktops, or bare-bones environment, it could be that there's nothing
in place to receive and forward the multimedia key events. In this case, you
can enable the *Multimedia Hotkeys* setting in *Preferences -> Controls*.

Additionally, when the main window has the focus, hitting ``<Space>`` will
start or stop the playback.



GStreamer Output Pipeline
-------------------------

This setting can be configured under *Preferences -> General -> Playback*. It's
quite a powerful thing, but not for the faint of heart. Here are some examples:

 * ``alsasink``: Use ALSA for the audio output.
 * ``alsasink device=hw:2``: Use ALSA, and select the second soundcard.
 * ``autoaudiosink ts-offset=5000000000``: Delay the audio output by 5 seconds
   (ie. 5000000000 nanoseconds).

How does it work? You must specify the name of the GStreamer element to use for
the audio sink, followed by optional arguments.

You can experiment with that on the command-line. Make sure to install the
`GStreamer Tools <https://gstreamer.freedesktop.org/documentation/tutorials/basic/gstreamer-tools.html>`_,
run a quick ``man gst-launch-1.0`` to warm you up, then try to do something
with it.

For example, to use the ALSA audio sink, you'd run this kind of command::

        STREAM=http://direct.fipradio.fr/live/fip-midfi.mp3
        gst-launch-1.0 souphttpsrc location="$STREAM" ! decodebin ! alsasink

Once you work out the details of what you want to achieve on the command-line,
you just have to copy-paste the last part in the Goodvibes configuration.



Command-Line And Scripting
--------------------------

Goodvibes can be used and abused with the command-line.

The command ``goodvibes-client`` gets you started, and provides basic control
over Goodvibes. The main purpose of this client is actually to ease development
and debug, and that's why it's a bit rough on the edge, and doesn't offer
everything that is provided by the user interface. But it's still good enough
for people who prefer the command-line over a graphical ui.

However, if you want to write some scripts that interact with Goodvibes, I
recommend **NOT TO** use the client, which might be modified anytime, and
doesn't promise any backward compatibility. Instead, you should make good use
of the D-Bus interfaces implemented by Goodvibes.

Goodvibes implements and exposes two interfaces on D-Bus (assuming you didn't
disable it in the preferences):

 * the native D-Bus interface is actually the one used by ``goodvibes-client``
   to communicate with Goodvibes. This interface might be modified anytime a
   new version is released, there's no plan to maintain any compatibility over
   different versions.
 * the MPRIS2 D-Bus interface is an interface implemented by many media players
   on GNU/Linux.

To get you started with D-Bus, you should know that there are different dbus
command-line tools around:

 * ``dbus-send`` is the most basic tool, provided with the dbus daemon.
 * ``gdbus`` is provided by GLib.
 * ``qdbus`` is provided by Qt.
 * ``busctl`` is provided by Systemd.

If you plan to write scripts that interact with Goodvibes, I recommend to use
the MPRIS2 interface as much as possible, mainly for two reasons:

 * It's well defined, stable over time, therefore your script will not break
   when a new version of Goodvibes is released.
 * You will be able to re-use your work with any other media player that
   support the MPRIS2 interface. And there's a lot of them.

You should refer to the `MPRIS2 Specification <https://specifications.freedesktop.org/mpris-spec/latest>`_
for more details.

A quick example with ``qdbus``::

        qdbus org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Goodvibes \
          /org/mpris/MediaPlayer2 \
          org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Player.Metadata



Conky Example
-------------

Here's a snippet to integrate Goodvibes in
`Conky <http://conky.sourceforge.net/documentation.html>`_::

  ${if_match "${execi 10 qdbus org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Goodvibes /org/mpris/MediaPlayer2 org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Player.PlaybackStatus}" == "Playing"}\
  Goodvibes Info
  Station:${execpi 10 qdbus org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Goodvibes /org/mpris/MediaPlayer2 org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Player.Metadata | grep "^goodvibes:station:" | cut -d':' -f3-}
  Artist - Track:${execpi 10 qdbus org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Goodvibes /org/mpris/MediaPlayer2 org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Player.Metadata | grep "^xesam:title:" | cut -d':' -f3-}\
  ${else}\
  Goodvibes is not playing\
  ${endif}

There are a few things to notice here:

 * **Don't use the native interface** ``io.gitlab.Goodvibes``, use the MPRIS2
   interface instead, ie. ``org.mpris.MediaPlayer2.Goodvibes``. The reason being
   that when you query Goodvibes on its native interface, it will automatically
   be launched by D-Bus in case it's not running.
 * If for some reason you really need to use the native interface, then use a
   D-Bus command-line tool that allows you to disable auto-starting the
   service. As far as I know, you can only do that with ``busctl --user
   --auto-start=no``.

One last word: I'm not a Conky guru, don't quote me on that snippet above ;)



Custom User-Agent
-----------------

If for some reasons you need to use a different user-agent for a specific radio
station, it's possible. You just need to edit manually the file where the
stations are saved. Where is this file?

 * ``~/.local/share/goodvibes/stations.xml`` if Goodvibes was installed with
   the package manager.
 * ``~/.var/app/io.gitlab.Goodvibes/data/goodvibes/stations.xml`` if installed
   with Flatpak.

In this file, add the field ``<user-agent>`` to the station that you want to
customize. For example::

        <Station>
          <uri>http://example.com/radio</uri>
          <name>Example Radio</name>
          <user-agent>Custom/1.0</user-agent>
        </Station>



GTK CSS Theming
---------------

Since version `0.7.1`, it's possible to add your own custom CSS to make
Goodvibes look different. The location for the CSS file depends on your
installation:

 * ``~/.local/share/goodvibes/style.css`` if Goodvibes was installed with
   the package manager.
 * ``~/.var/app/io.gitlab.Goodvibes/data/goodvibes/style.css`` if installed
   with Flatpak.

For example::

        /* Draw a border around the window */
        window {
          border: 5px solid;
        }

        /* Fancy buttons */
        @define-color green  rgba(0,133,66,1);
        @define-color yellow rgba(255,224,0,1);
        @define-color red    rgba(231,0,1,1);

        button {
          border-style: none;
          border-radius: 50%;
        }

        button:hover:nth-child(3n+1) {
          background-color: @green;
        }

        button:hover:nth-child(3n+2) {
          background-color: @yellow;
        }

        button:hover:nth-child(3n+3) {
          background-color: @red;
        }

For more details, refer to the documentation:

 * `GTK CSS Overview <https://developer.gnome.org/gtk3/stable/chap-css-overview.html>`_
 * `GTK CSS Properties <https://developer.gnome.org/gtk3/stable/chap-css-properties.html>`_
